<h2 id= 'setup'>SETTING UP TYPESCRIPT</h2>

[Back to Index](_sidebar.md)

1. For this course, ensure node is installed on your computer. It provides the `npm` package manager for installing TypeScript, and also lets you run the JavaScript files that will be generated by the TypeScript compiler.

Download [node](https://nodejs.org/)

To check that node is installed, run this in your terminal:

```bash
node -v
```

You should see a version number like `v20.11.1`.

npm (Node Package Manager) comes with Node.js automatically. Verify installation:

```bash
npm -v
```

You should see a version number like `10.2.4`.

2. Install TypeScript globally on your computer. It allows you to access the TypeScript compiler. Run this:

```bash
npm install -g typescript
```

Verify installation:

```bash
tsc -v
```

NB: "tsc" stands for TypeScript Compiler.
You should see a version number like `Version 5.2.2`.

3. Now, if you are working with TypeScript in a project, you would typically install it as a developer dependency within that project so that teammates can use the same version:

```bash
npm install typescript --save-dev
```

You can check your `package.json` file to confirm installation.

4. When working with TypeScript, you may want to provide a configuration file that tells TypeScript how to behave. Run this:

```bash
npx tsc --init
```

The command above scaffolds a `tsconfig.json` file which specifies options that the TypeScript compiler will use.

NB: `tsc --init` will work as long as you have TypeScript installed globally, but it is recommended to run `npx tsc --init` as this generates the config based on the version of TypeScript installed in your project's `node_modules`.

5. To create a file for practice, run:

```bash
touch practice.ts
```

In the file, type this code:

```ts
const a: number = 2;
console.log(a);
```

Now, attempt to run:

```bash
node practice.ts
```

You will get an error because node expects a "js" file, but what we have is a "ts" file.

Run:

```bash
tsc
```

This will create a `practice.js` file which will contain the JavaScript equivalent of what we typed.

Now run:

```ts
node practice.js
```

If you want TypeScript to watch for changes, run:

```bash
tsc -w
```
